Hi friends
In this video we are going to discuss about bit fields
Using bit fields, we can efficiently utilise memory space of
structure or union members
This programme uses eight bytes to store the status
Here ON takes four bytes and OFF takes four bytes
But actually we are going to use values one and zero
for on and off respectively
It doesn't require eight bytes of memory when we know
the value of a member which never exceeds a certain
limit
We can efficiently handle it using bit fields in structure
or union members
We can specify the required size in bits like this
This is the syntax for that. member colon size
in bits. Now take the same structure
Status here on and off will only use one bit
so we can specify it's width as 1
Now this structure takes only four bytes of memory which
is 32 bits. on will take one bit and off will
Also take one bit
If a print the size of the above structure it
will be four and not eight
Here we have reduced four bytes of memory using bit
field here fields assigned from left to right some machines
can assign it right to left
The order of assignment will vary from machine to machine
Now let us see a sample programme here unsigned indicates
that the members will not have signed values
So what is the difference between signed and unsigned values ?
Sign type uses some more significant bit to store the
sign status.
That is whether the number is positive or negative
So if we have 32 bits, one bit will be
used to store the sign and values will be stored
in the next 31 bits
In the case of unsigned the whole 32 bits will
be used to store the value as they don't have
any particular sign
The idea here is to utilise the whole 32 bit
for storing values
So we have members unsigned integers on and off and
we have specified the width of one bit
Now we set on =1 and off =0
using structure variable s
Now we print on and off and we will get
one and zero printed
Let's take another example
This structure declaration is to store a date
So we have the members day month and year if
we don't use bit fields
This structure uses 12 bytes to store the date four
bytes each for day month and year
So in total it takes 12 bytes
We can solve the problem effectively using bit fields
We know that the maximum value of day is 31. five
bits are enough to store the day value
That is 2 power 5 equal to 32 so we
can specify unsigned int day 5
Similarly the maximum value for the member month is 12
4 Bits are enough to store the month value 2 power 4
equal to 16 so we can specify unsigned int
month 4.  we can use all the remaining 23
bits to store the year for the year
We can specify unsigned int year 23
So see the programme here we said day =2
which takes five bits and set month =7
which takes four bits and year= 2019 which takes
the remaining 23 bits
Now we print the date and we get the output
2 7 2019
So here the structure only takes four bytes or 32
bits instead of 12 bytes
This is how we can improve memory efficiency using bit
fields
Now when will bid field take additional memory? It will
take additional memory only when we exceed the whole 32
bits
For an example Consider this structure status
We have the members on and off. on Takes 31
bits and off
Take one bit total of 32 bits
This case is okay
There is no issue
Now consider another case here on takes 31 bits and
off takes two bits so on can be placed here
But what about off? There is only one bit
left
So it's not possible to place off here and we
have to place it in another block
So now the size of structure becomes 4+4 = 8
bytes
So if we exceed the whole 32 bits it will
take another four bytes
So if we print the size of the structure it
will be eight now
So that's all and thank you for watching this video